Okay, And now, since 1981,
 there has been a lot of progress 
in designing quantum algorithms and thinking about implementation
so that there's a lot of work on how to utilize quantum power. 
And for example, 
I want to specifically mention a particularly famous and striking example
namely that we know that in modern cryptography, 
there are many crypto systems to protect secrets. 
They would use something related to factoring of large integers.
And now if I give you, say, a 400-bit -- a 400-digit integer, 
it turns out to be extremely difficult to factor it. 
So we all know that multiplication is easy. 
If you multiply two 200-digit numbers, 
I think that you can do it very fast,
and certainly with a computer, you can do it really fast. 
But if I give you a 400-bit -- digit number,
and ask you where are the two factors, and you will have difficulty doing it. 
And now this problem turns out to have a quantum algorithm, 
proposed by Peter Shor in 1994.
And it's been proved 
that a quantum computer will be able to factor it much faster. 
So there are many ways to estimate 
what the running times are of the quantum computer.
and so one estimate saying that 
if you today want to factor at 400-digit number on the supercomputer, 
it would take 600,000 years.
but if you do it on a quantum computer,
and when a suitably sized quantum computer is available, 
ok, then you can do it in a few hours, and possibly minutes. 
So Peter Shor's algorithm, 
it's probably the most famous quantum algorithm. 
But that's not the only quantum algorithm that is actually important.
I mean, the factoring is great for crypto-code breaking,
 but there are other things actually related to.
one of the questions from Feynman.
 If you have quantum computers, can you simulate quantum systems? 
And it turns out for by now, 
there are large classes of problems people have proved,
 that it's possible to simulate many quantum physical systems with the quantum computer. 
And now, in particular,
if you really have very powerful quantum computers to simulate physical systems, 
you would be able to make progress on problems 
such as the design of new materials, or the design of drugs, and so on. 
And so it would have enormous potential impact. 
And there are things that are actually pretty classical type of nonlinear optimization, 
and also there are things related to problems in machine learning, and AI, 
Quantum computing is in addition very useful in related fields, 
like in quantum communication and quantum cryptography.
I think it's a subject that the QCrypt conference is devoted to.
 So this would relate to things like unbreakable codes
and many other cryptographic operations using quantum operations. 
And now, I think that it's fit to point out 
that we have some of the originators of the field and also great system builders here. 
Ah, I think that the famous work by Charles Bennett and Gilles Brassard 
is really the kind of the people who pioneered the whole field. 
And professor Jian-Wei Pan is a person 
who is really one of the leading experimental system builders in this area.
 I think including the Micius satellite.
I think this is among the great achievements.
And now, as I mentioned the very beginning 
the "how" and "why" of quantum computer 
remain mysterious to outsiders.
And so now we're going to the heart of the matter.
 Let's see that how quantum power can be used to speed things up. 
And actually, we are going to look at this famous quantum algorithm
for doing a factoring by Peter Shor. 
Peter Shor's algorithm is very mathematical, 
so I'm going to present it in a different way. 
And so, kind of hide all the mathematics, 
But doing things in a more conceptual way.
So I'm going to do it in two steps.
In the first step, 
I'm going to describe an alternative classical algorithms 
to the standard factoring algorithms that a number of theorists are doing
So we're going to design a classical algorithm to solve this problem. 
And unfortunately, this classical algorithm would also run in exponential time
However, this algorithm is going to have the advantage 
where if you look at it and if you think about the essence of quantum mechanics, 
you'll be able to simulate it with a quantum computer, 
with the exponential speedup. 
And so therefore, we're going to do a two-step thing. 
First, we're going to design a classical algorithm, 
and the second part is that we're going to show the quantum power is enough 
to simulate how this classical algorithms is used
And the wave-particle duality is going to come in at the second stage. 
And now, actually, this classical algorithm itself is really interesting 
because it has some famous forerunner 
because it's really the descendant of some very famous work in physics. 
And this branch of physics or chemistry, is called x-ray crystallography. 
Okay,it's using x-rays to take pictures 
like you know, that we take chest x-ray pictures to see whether there is any disease. 
Or when you hurt your leg, 
you take x-ray pictures to see whether the bones are intact or not. 
Okay now, this very famous line of work starting in 1895 with Roentgen,
 who accidentally discovered a mysterious phenomenon which he termed x-rays. 
Okay,and it's a novel thing. 
People had difficulty determining whether it's a particle or a wave. 
And, but in any case Roentgen got recognized by his work in discovering the x-ray.
And he actually was the first Nobel Prize winner in 1901 of the physics prize
And now in 1912, von Laue solved the problem, resolved the problem, 
whether an x-ray is a particle or a wave. 
And Von Laue, he had this great idea
 by shining the x-ray through crystals like salt and so on.
And he managed to get a diffraction pattern. 
And I think according to the standard of the time, 
if you can get diffraction pattern, then it has to be wave
because particles, they don't interfere with each other. 
Now that's not the end of the story 
I think it's fine for von Laue to receive a Nobel prize for his work,
but there are better things to come. 
In 1913, the Braggs, father and son team, 
they derived a mathematical formula for the diffraction pattern.
To see that, well, how do you explain the diffraction pattern
Well, the mathematics using optics, then you can do it
And, this has a very big implication.
Once you have the ability to use mathematics to analyze and make predictions, 
then you can use it in research
I mean suppose you have a crystal of unknown structure, 
and you take some x-ray pictures, 
maybe many of them from different angles and so on.
Now, you look at the mathematics,
sometimes you will be able to recover what the crystal structure must be like. 
That's a great thought.
that you look at -- you take a photo of something, 
and you come back to figure out what's the secret of the crystals. 
And this is immensely successful, 
and it used many, many Nobel prizes in the next fifty years 
 And, actually, they get more and more ambitious. 
You can,Initially, because the math formula is pretty messy, 
so you can only analyze very simple things,
like in inorganic material molecules
but later on, even very large molecules of importance to biology,
people found ways of analyzing them 
and determining the structure of these proteins and these structures.
So very complicated things you can do, by this simple idea (PPT 14)
And so now let's summarize what we have done so far  
What we have discovered is 
that if you use the x-rays, I mean this is light wave.
If you use it and you take pictures, you can recover. 
Or in our computer science mind, 
you can compute a function of the object some secret of the object. 
So now the question, this would be an intellectual leap
in saying that if I look at an integer, 
is there a way for me to take an x-ray picture of the integer?
 Of course, if you write the bits, you put an x-ray through it. 
I think you would just get exactly back what you start with.
So, you have to build a crystal somehow, based upon this integer. 
And then you take x-ray threw it. 
And perhaps you will be able to do it. 
So the answer is yes, 
the kind of the first stage is to design this classical algorithm.
And now we are designing really an optical algorithm.
But, since it's classical physics, if it's classical physics,
I can simulate it with the classical computer. 
So it will be a classical algorithm. Okay.
So, let's just imagine that we're taking this x-ray photo of the integer n
and first we -- there is some way -- you have to do it smartly, in order to grow a crystal. 
And then you have this x-ray on it. And look at the diffraction pattern,
maybe you have to do it several times. 
And you figure out, you examine the photo and you figure out what this factor is. 
This can actually be done. 
There's kind of messy mathematics in it, but this actually can be done.
 And so this is basically the pictorial way of seeing it. 
You have this integer. 
You kind of do an optical experiment. 
You look at the pattern and you see what it is.
And now the problem is that the crystal is of enormous size. 
So essentially, if you do the naïve thing, build this crystal, 
I think the whole galaxy, and maybe the whole universe, will not be enough to support this experiment. 
And now come to the next stage. So now here's the critical observation
The first one is that we don't need the whole photo.
Because classically, you take an x-ray, 
the doctor will see the whole negative, and then look at it, but we don't need that. 
Actually, we only need a few sample points. 
So we don't need exponential number of samples.
We only need a polynomial number of samples. 
So that's progress.
Now, how do you take samples? 
Even taking one sample, It's sort of difficult,
because if you look at taking one sample, 
the calculation you do, it's the sum over an exponential number of terms. 
So if you use the classical algorithm to do it, it's still hard. 
But that exponential sum is very structured. 
So that if you use a clever way to do the [computation]
 if you have a quantum computer, 
you can do something called the quantum Fourier transform. 
 if you have quantum computer, you can do the trick of the monkey king. 
So that you can do the kind of parallel search, 
and do it with an exponential amount of saving in terms of time. 
Ok, now, what does it mean to take one sample?
 And now here comes the punch line, 
where the wave-particle duality comes in. 
Taking one sample means that, usually when I take an x-ray picture, 
there are many x-ray photons are going through your body and so on. 
But suppose you make a light to be dimmer and dimmer
 until eventually there's only one photon at a time that can go through the apparatus.
And now the wave-particle duality is saying
that even though it's just one photon, one particle going through it,
that actually, the probability distribution will be identical to the classical one. 
So that you are going to have exactly the same distribution,
so if I can sample, 
just do it for one photon, and detect where the photon lands. 
And you see that the critical point is that when it's a particle. 
And then you can talk about I want to detect where the photon will land. 
When you measure them, they can only land in one place. 
So you get a very definitive sample point of the whole thing. 
So, the net result is that you combine these together, 
you get a quantum algorithm, of a kind of polynomial running time.
I think that's the kind of summary of the main part that the main point I want to make that
where does the quantum power come from? 
It's no more mysterious than the mystery of quantum physics. 
