Okay, And now, since 1981,
自1981年以来，
 there has been a lot of progress 
科学家已经取得了巨大进步,
in designing quantum algorithms and thinking about implementation
在量子算法的设计和实现上。
so that there's a lot of work on how to utilize quantum power. 
做出了很多利用量子特性加速计算的工作。
And for example, 
比如说,
I want to specifically mention a particularly famous and striking example
下面我会举一个非常著名的量子算法例子。
namely that we know that in modern cryptography, 
我们知道在现代密码学中，
there are many crypto systems to protect secrets. 
有许多密码系统用来保护信息。
They would use something related to factoring of large integers.
它们利用大数分解来进行加密
And now if I give you, say, a 400-bit -- a 400-digit integer, 
现在如果我给你一个400位的数字
it turns out to be extremely difficult to factor it. 
事实证明你很难直接分解出它的因数
So we all know that multiplication is easy. 
我们知道两个数的乘法很容易
If you multiply two 200-digit numbers, 
如果把两个200位的数相乘，
I think that you can do it very fast,
你可以很快的计算出结果。
and certainly with a computer, you can do it really fast. 
如果用计算机来计算的话，甚至会更快。
But if I give you a 400-bit -- digit number,
但是我给你一个400位的数字，
and ask you where are the two factors, and you will have difficulty doing it. 
让你计算出它的两个因数，你很难解出来。
And now this problem turns out to have a quantum algorithm, 
但事实上有个量子算法能解决这个问题，
proposed by Peter Shor in 1994.
它是由Peter Shor在1994年提出。
And it's been proved 
而且已经被证明
that a quantum computer will be able to factor it much faster. 
量子计算机能够非常快速的分解大数。
So there are many ways to estimate 
有很多方法可以估计
what the running times are of the quantum computer.
量子计算机运行该算法的时间。
and so one estimate saying that 
一种估计是，
if you today want to factor at 400-digit number on the supercomputer, 
如果你使用超级计算机来分解一个400位的数字，
it would take 600,000 years.
大概需要60万年。
but if you do it on a quantum computer,
但如果你用量子计算机来计算，
and when a suitably sized quantum computer is available, 
假设我们已经有了一台合适的量子计算机，
ok, then you can do it in a few hours, and possibly minutes. 
你只需要几个小时甚至几十分钟就能完成计算。
So Peter Shor’s algorithm, 
所以Peter Shor的这个量子算法，
it's probably the most famous quantum algorithm. 
也许是最著名的量子算法。
But that's not the only quantum algorithm that is actually important.
但这并不是唯一重要的量子算法。
I mean, the factoring is great for crypto-code breaking,
我的意思是，大数分解算法对破解加密系统非常有用
 but there are other things actually related to.
但是也有许多其他的重要算法，
one of the questions from Feynman.
其中一个便是费曼的问题：
 If you have quantum computers, can you simulate quantum systems? 
“量子计算机否能够模拟量子系统？”
And it turns out for by now, 
事实上到目前为止，
there are large classes of problems people have proved,
已经证明,量子计算机能解决许多种问题，
 that it's possible to simulate many quantum physical systems with the quantum computer. 
用量子计算机也确实可以模拟许多量子系统。
And now, in particular,
现在尤其是
if you really have very powerful quantum computers to simulate physical systems, 
可以利用量子计算机去模拟特定的量子系统
you would be able to make progress on problems 
从而可以在许多问题上取得进展，
such as the design of new materials, or the design of drugs, and so on. 
比如新材料的开发，以及新药物的研制等。
And so it would have enormous potential impact. 
所以，量子计算机将会产生巨大的影响。
And there are things that are actually pretty classical type of nonlinear optimization, 
此外还有一些经典的非线性优化问题
and also there are things related to problems in machine learning, and AI, 
以及机器学习，人工智能相关的问题
Quantum computing is in addition very useful in related fields, 
量子计算在一些相关的领域也非常有用
like in quantum communication and quantum cryptography.
比如量子通信和量子密码学。
I think it's a subject that the QCrypt conference is devoted to.
我认为这也是Qcrypt会议讨论的议题。
 So this would relate to things like unbreakable codes
这涉及到像使用量子计算来破译密码
and many other cryptographic operations using quantum operations. 
以及其它的加密解密操作。
And now, I think that it's fit to point out 
现在我认为这是一个合适的时机去介绍一下
that we have some of the originators of the field and also great system builders here. 
这个领域的一些先驱者和开创者。
Ah, I think that the famous work by Charles Bennett and Gilles Brassard 
坐在台下的Charles Bennett 和 Gilles Brassard做出了许多著名的工作，
is really the kind of the people who pioneered the whole field. 
他们是这个领域的伟大先驱。
And professor Jian-Wei Pan is a person 
此外，潘建伟教授
who is really one of the leading experimental system builders in this area.
是这个领域中实验方向的杰出领导者之一，
 I think including the Micius satellite.
我认为像墨子号量子卫星
I think this is among the great achievements.
是一个非常伟大的成就。
And now, as I mentioned the very beginning 
正如我前面提到的，
the “how” and “why” of quantum computer 
“为什么量子计算机这么强大？它是如何做到的？”
remain mysterious to outsiders.
外行仍然不能理解。
And so now we're going to the heart of the matter.
所以我现在要谈到问题的核心。
 Let's see that how quantum power can be used to speed things up. 
量子计算机是如何加速计算的？
And actually, we are going to look at this famous quantum algorithm
我接下来将介绍这个著名的量子算法-
for doing a factoring by Peter Shor. 
由Shor发明的大数分解量子算法。
Peter Shor’s algorithm is very mathematical, 
Shor的这个算法是非常数学化的，
so I’m going to present it in a different way. 
所以我将以不同的方式呈现它。
And so, kind of hide all the mathematics, 
我会略过高深的数学表达，
But doing things in a more conceptual way.
以更概念性的方式来讲解。
So I’m going to do it in two steps.
因此我会分成两步来介绍Shor算法。
In the first step, 
在第一步中，
I'm going to describe an alternative classical algorithms 
我将描述一个经典算法
to the standard factoring algorithms that a number of theorists are doing
来替代大数分解算法。
So we're going to design a classical algorithm to solve this problem. 
即我们设计了一个经典算法来解决这个问题。
And unfortunately, this classical algorithm would also run in exponential time
不幸的是，这个经典算法需要消耗指数级多的时间
However, this algorithm is going to have the advantage 
但是这个经典算法也有好处，
where if you look at it and if you think about the essence of quantum mechanics, 
它可以帮助你理解量子力学的本质。
you'll be able to simulate it with a quantum computer, 
你可以用量子计算机模拟它，
with the exponential speedup. 
并获得指数加速。
And so therefore, we’re going to do a two-step thing. 
因此我们将分成两步
First, we're going to design a classical algorithm, 
第一步我们要设计一个经典算法，
and the second part is that we're going to show the quantum power is enough 
第二步我们将展示量子计算机足够强大
to simulate how this classical algorithms is used
去模拟经典算法。
And the wave-particle duality is going to come in at the second stage. 
波粒二象性会出现在第二步中。
And now, actually, this classical algorithm itself is really interesting 
实际上这个经典算法本身很有趣，
because it has some famous forerunner 
因为它涉及到一些著名的先驱科学家的工作。
because it's really the descendant of some very famous work in physics. 
它也确实是由一些著名的物理学工作启发而成。
And this branch of physics or chemistry, is called x-ray crystallography. 
这个物理或者化学分支，叫做X射线晶体学。
Okay,it's using x-rays to take pictures 
它是用X光来拍摄照片，
like you know, that we take chest x-ray pictures to see whether there is any disease. 
就像我们拍胸部X光照片看是否有任何疾病。
Or when you hurt your leg, 
或者当你的腿受伤时，
you take x-ray pictures to see whether the bones are intact or not. 
你会拍X光照片看骨头是否受伤。
Okay now, this very famous line of work starting in 1895 with Roentgen,
这个著名的工作起源于Roentgen在1895年的发现，
 who accidentally discovered a mysterious phenomenon which he termed x-rays. 
他偶然发现了一种他称之为X射线的神秘现象。
Okay,and it's a novel thing. 
这是一个新奇的东西。
People had difficulty determining whether it's a particle or a wave. 
人们很难确定它是一个粒子还是一个波。
And, but in any case Roentgen got recognized by his work in discovering the x-ray.
无论如何，Roentgen因发现X射线的工作中而得到了认可。
And he actually was the first Nobel Prize winner in 1901 of the physics prize
他实际上在1901年获得了第一届诺贝尔物理学奖。
And now in 1912, von Laue solved the problem, resolved the problem, 
然后在1912年，von Laue分析了这个问题，
whether an x-ray is a particle or a wave. 
X射线到底是粒子还是波？
And Von Laue, he had this great idea
他提出一个很棒的想法：
 by shining the x-ray through crystals like salt and so on.
把X射线照射到像盐这样的晶体上。
And he managed to get a diffraction pattern. 
他设法得到一个衍射图案。
And I think according to the standard of the time, 
按照当时的科学理论水平，
if you can get diffraction pattern, then it has to be wave
如果能得到衍射图案，那就证明它肯定是波。
because particles, they don't interfere with each other. 
因为粒子不会相互干涉。
Now that's not the end of the story 
但故事没还有结束。
I think it's fine for von Laue to receive a Nobel prize for his work,
我认为von Laue值得获得诺贝尔奖，
but there are better things to come. 
但接下来还有更棒的发现。
In 1913, the Braggs, father and son team, 
1913年，Braggs父子
they derived a mathematical formula for the diffraction pattern.
推导出了衍射现象的数学公式。
To see that, well, how do you explain the diffraction pattern
想想，你如何解释衍射图样？
Well, the mathematics using optics, then you can do it
用怎样的数学公式才能解释它。
And, this has a very big implication.
这个工作意义重大。
Once you have the ability to use mathematics to analyze and make predictions, 
一旦你能用数学公式来分析和预测，
then you can use it in research
那么你就能运用在实验中。
I mean suppose you have a crystal of unknown structure, 
假设你有一个未知结构的晶体，
and you take some x-ray pictures, 
你拍摄了一些x射线照片，
maybe many of them from different angles and so on.
也许从各个角度都拍摄了。
Now, you look at the mathematics,
现在根据数学公式，
sometimes you will be able to recover what the crystal structure must be like. 
你甚至可以恢复出晶体的结构。
That's a great thought.
这真是个好办法.
that you look at -- you take a photo of something, 
你只是拍了张照片，
and you come back to figure out what's the secret of the crystals. 
然后就能恢复出晶体的结构。
And this is immensely successful, 
这个方法是非常成功的，
and it used many, many Nobel prizes in the next fifty years 
因为接下来的许多年由它又产生了许多诺贝尔奖。
 And, actually, they get more and more ambitious. 
事实上，科学家们后来变得更有野心。
You can,Initially, because the math formula is pretty messy, 
因为最初的数学公式很粗糙，
so you can only analyze very simple things,
你只能分析非常简单的东西，
like in inorganic material molecules
比如无机材料分子。
but later on, even very large molecules of importance to biology,
但后来，可以逐渐分析更复杂的生物大分子。
people found ways of analyzing them 
科学家们找到了分析它们的方法，
and determining the structure of these proteins and these structures.
并确定了这些蛋白质的结构
So very complicated things you can do, by this simple idea (PPT 14)
所以通过非常简单的思路，却可以做很复杂的事情。
And so now let's summarize what we have done so far  
现在来总结一下我们做了什么
What we have discovered is 
我们发现
that if you use the x-rays, I mean this is light wave.
如果你使用X射线，即这种光波，
If you use it and you take pictures, you can recover. 
对一些东西拍照，你就可恢复出这些东西的结构。
Or in our computer science mind, 
用我们计算机科学的语言来说，
you can compute a function of the object some secret of the object. 
你可以计算出被研究对象的一些秘密
So now the question, this would be an intellectual leap
所以这是智力上的一大飞跃。
in saying that if I look at an integer, 
类似的如果我想分析一个整数，
is there a way for me to take an x-ray picture of the integer?
有没有办法让我拍一张整数的X光照片？
 Of course, if you write the bits, you put an x-ray through it. 
当然，如果你写下这个数字，然后用X射线照射它，
I think you would just get exactly back what you start with.
我想你就回到了我前面刚开始讲的地方。
So, you have to build a crystal somehow, based upon this integer. 
即你需要根据这个整数构造一个晶体，
And then you take x-ray threw it. 
然后用X射线去照射它。
And perhaps you will be able to do it. 
也许你能做到这一点。
So the answer is yes, 
答案是肯定的。
the kind of the first stage is to design this classical algorithm.
第一步就是设计出这个经典算法，
And now we are designing really an optical algorithm.
而我们正在设计的就是这种光学算法。
But, since it's classical physics, if it's classical physics,
但由于它是经典物理学范畴，
I can simulate it with the classical computer. 
我们可以用经典计算机来模拟它。
So it will be a classical algorithm. Okay.
所以它是一个经典算法。
So, let's just imagine that we're taking this x-ray photo of the integer n
然后想象一下用X射线去给这个整数n拍照
and first we -- there is some way -- you have to do it smartly, in order to grow a crystal. 
不过首先你需要足够聪明地去构造出一个晶体
And then you have this x-ray on it. And look at the diffraction pattern,
然后你用X射线去拍照，看一下衍射图案
maybe you have to do it several times. 
当然也许你需要多试几次
And you figure out, you examine the photo and you figure out what this factor is. 
接着你分析照片，就可以得到这个数字的因数
This can actually be done. 
实际上这是可以完成的,
There's kind of messy mathematics in it, but this actually can be done.
尽管里面涉及到一些复杂的数学。
 And so this is basically the pictorial way of seeing it. 
这基本上就是图像化的去理解这个经典算法
You have this integer. 
即你有一个整数需要因数分解，
You kind of do an optical experiment. 
然后你做一个光学实验
You look at the pattern and you see what it is.
通过衍射图案就能分析出结果
And now the problem is that the crystal is of enormous size. 
现在问题是这个晶体的体积非常巨大。
So essentially, if you do the naïve thing, build this crystal, 
如果你想天真的去建造这个晶体，
I think the whole galaxy, and maybe the whole universe, will not be enough to support this experiment. 
我认为整个银河系，甚至整个宇宙都不够大
And now come to the next stage. So now here's the critical observation
现在进入下一步，也是最关键的地方。
The first one is that we don't need the whole photo.
第一我们实际上不需要整张照片
Because classically, you take an x-ray, 
因为传统上你去照X光，
the doctor will see the whole negative, and then look at it, but we don't need that. 
医生会看到整个底片，但我们不需要。
Actually, we only need a few sample points. 
实际上我们只需要几个样本点就够了，
So we don't need exponential number of samples.
并不需要指数级的样本数。
We only need a polynomial number of samples. 
我们只需要多项式量级的样本数，
So that's progress.
这就是进步之处。
Now, how do you take samples? 
现在的问题是如何去采样？
Even taking one sample, It's sort of difficult,
即使是采一个样本点? 也是很困难的。
because if you look at taking one sample, 
因为如果你取一个样本进行计算，
the calculation you do, it's the sum over an exponential number of terms. 
你需要对指数多的项求和
So if you use the classical algorithm to do it, it's still hard. 
所以，如果你使用经典算法来计算，它仍然很难。
But that exponential sum is very structured. 
但是指数多的项求和是非常结构化的
So that if you use a clever way to do the [computation]
如果你用一种聪明的方式去计算
 if you have a quantum computer, 
即如果你有一台量子计算机，
you can do something called the quantum Fourier transform. 
那么你可以使用量子傅里叶变换进行计算。
 if you have quantum computer, you can do the trick of the monkey king. 
打个比方，你可以使用前面提到的孙悟空的那种本领。
So that you can do the kind of parallel search, 
这样你就可以进行并行搜索，
and do it with an exponential amount of saving in terms of time. 
并指数级的节省时间。
Ok, now, what does it mean to take one sample?
这对采一个样本点意味着什么呢？
 And now here comes the punch line, 
现在就是最精彩的地方了，
where the wave-particle duality comes in. 
波粒二象性将会起作用了。
Taking one sample means that, usually when I take an x-ray picture, 
通常当你拍一张X光照片时，
there are many x-ray photons are going through your body and so on. 
有许多X光的光子穿过你的身体。
But suppose you make a light to be dimmer and dimmer
但是假设X光越来越弱，
 until eventually there's only one photon at a time that can go through the apparatus.
直到最终每次只有一个光子能通过装置。
And now the wave-particle duality is saying
波粒二象性告诉我们，
that even though it's just one photon, one particle going through it,
即使只有一个光子，仍然能通过它。
that actually, the probability distribution will be identical to the classical one. 
事实上，一个光子通过装置后的概率分布将与经典情形相同，
So that you are going to have exactly the same distribution,
这样你就会得到完全相同的分布。
so if I can sample, 
因此如果我能采样，
just do it for one photon, and detect where the photon lands. 
只需要发射一个光子并探测光子着陆的位置。
And you see that the critical point is that when it’s a particle. 
你看，关键之处在于只需要一个粒子
And then you can talk about I want to detect where the photon will land. 
然后探测光子通过晶体后的位置分布。
When you measure them, they can only land in one place. 
当你测量它们时，它们只能在处在一个位置。
So you get a very definitive sample point of the whole thing. 
因此，这个样本点包含了整个晶体的信息。
So, the net result is that you combine these together, 
因此，最终的结果是把这些组合在一起，
you get a quantum algorithm, of a kind of polynomial running time.
得到一个多项式运行时间的量子算法。
I think that's the kind of summary of the main part that the main point I want to make that
总结主体部分，我想要表达的主要观点是
where does the quantum power come from? 
量子计算的强大能力来自于什么地方
It's no more mysterious than the mystery of quantum physics. 
其实它并没有比量子物理更加神秘	
